# African International Relations
\
Alex Horne
\
PS 4180

Thomson begins by reviewing the relationships between African states. Even during the late colonial-period, Nationalist movements worked in solidarity and sometimes at odds with one another and those relationships persisted as African countries won their independence. In particular, Arab Nationalism in the North, anti-Apartheid in the South, and Pan-Africanism shaped interstate relations. However, the influence of these three movements paled in comparison to that of the Cold War duopoly: the United States and the Soviet Union. The Americans were obsessed with avoiding another "Fall of China" or "Cuba", leading them to completely misread events such as the Zanzibar Revolution or the Congo Crisis as a "communist plot." The US relied on overt economic aid to friendly dictators and resorted to subterfuge and assassination where aid failed. The Communists, for their part, had no historical relationship in Africa, so they preferred to support anti-imperialist struggle with cheap arms and expand socialism in the Third-World. This strategy also served their instrumental interest of breaking out of the containment noose that the US had around it, from Europe, to Iran, to Japan.

Besides Washington and Moscow, other overseas powers were involved in African development. Cuba and the People's Republic of China provided military and economic aid to countries whom the Soviets had no interest in helping. France has proven to be the most involved of all the former colonisers, helping to build a political and economic Francosphere for their and Belgium's former colonies. 

The collapse of the Soviet Bloc meant that Africa was no longer a strategic concern for the US. Thomson describes this period as an apolitical moment, where blanket support for dictatorship and minority-rule was rescinded. This is neoliberal obfuscation; the Neoliberal turn was deeply ideological and consolidated and entrenched Western ideology in the international system. At any rate, the long-running conflicts on the continent ended in negotiated settlement rather than winner-takes-all victories, and the OAU was reorganised into the African Union. 

Sovereign debt relief is one of the main topics between African nations and overseas governments, in particular Britain since the 1990s. The UK's attitude towards military action or economic aid in Africa varies with partisan control of Westminster, whereas successive French governments had a more consistent position of frequent and intimate intervention in Francophone Africa. Besides European Powers, China and Arab Gulf States also have significant economic interests in Africa: the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia relies on Red Sea states for food and the PRC imports African primary commodities and petroleum.

Since Gulf Oil was so strictly controlled by US-aligned powers, Beijing sought to develop a parallel source of fuel (would it be possible to call this practice petro-Mercantilism?). In exchange, African markets receive Chinese service industries and the infrastructure necessary to make resource extraction and market access possible. Again, it's unlikely that China wishes to build up potential economic rivals in Africa, whereas World Bank development funds ostensibly *do* want just that. Beyond the economic quid-pro-quos, some also argue that Chinese investments undermine the conditionality leverage that Western states use to promote good-governance. But it makes sense from Beijing's perspective: African government is not China's business, just as they insist the Mainland's government is not Washington's. Ironically, the Communists have completely abandoned their anti-imperialist position and this has not assuaged liberals of their suspicions towards the Mainland.  

In the case example for Somalia, Thomson illustrates how sovereignty (or the lack thereof) affects the lives of ordinary people. Irredentism as a political objective overrode Cold War alliances for Barré's government, which had an bloated military and nothing better to do with it than forcibly unite the Somali homelands. The US's Cold-War mindset overrode good sense, and no doubt the Saudis were also very keen on securing their base in the Red Sea right as they made a hard turn towards Wahabbism in 1979. Barré's former Soviet patrons were also finding themselves quagmired in Afghanistan and had no attention to devote to the Horn of Africa. Barré, lacking serious legitimacy, played off ethnic groups against one another to maintain control -- which laid the groundwork for the sectarian violence that characterises the country today. When the Cold War ended, and the US left Somalia, the military aid propping up his coalition evaporated and civil war erupted. The US peacekeepers arrived to avert a famine, but mission creep and blowback undermined support from abroad and tainted its neutrality. After the US left, the state collapsed completely, leaving a power vacuum into which Salafists such as al-Shabaab stepped in. 

What is to be learned from the Somali example? First, it explains why African states resolutely respect the colonial boundaries, no matter how inconvenient or ridiculous they are. Second, foreign influence peddlers and idiotic cold-war mindsets are what led to the zombie state headquartered in Mogadishu. 
