# Research Questions

Alex Horne
POLS 705 Fall 2023

1. What is the effect of e-cigarette regulations on political attitudes of teenage voters towards the state? Restated causally, do e-cigarette regulations lead to libertarian political attitudes among teenage voters? 
    a. Does the effect vary between colleges? (I've got a former student of mine who had this hypothesis occur to him in a dream, and it would be cool to see if it changed between Community College and KU. The best way to test this would have been before and after the regulations were put into place, so maybe this question can't be answered feasibly). 
2. Does describing right wing terrorists as White nationalists increase threat perceptions among politically-informed people more than non-informed people?  (Mostly, I'm trying to suss out if political education, awareness of white nationalism as a movement, and actually understanding what those words mean have any effect. As I stated previously, I'm not sure that people really know what white nationalism is, despite hearing about it and seeing it in the news....)
3. What is the relationship between support for Ukraine's fight against the Russian invasion and political informed-ness? (Informed-ness being conceptualised as familiarity with and knowledge of the region and the conflict; operationalised more specifically as being able to locate Ukraine on a map, recall basic facts about the country and its history etc. Here, the problem would be finding enough variation in informed-ness as the IV -- plus, direction of causality could easily go either way)
    a. Would make a good case for testing against the Tigrayan conflict, which receives comparatively little attention (and anecdotally, I know that familiarity with Ethiopia and the Horn of Africa leads many people to have strong opinions on the topic, but it's never in the headlines)
4. Does receiving military training and aid from the US correlate positively with likelihood of military coup in West African States? (not a survey but HOLY CRAP this is a big question right now! probably best suited for qualitative research in a few years when/if things settle down.) Do the size of that aid and duration of the training relationship correlate with significant increases in the probability of a coup? (Important because the Nigerienne coup came weeks before Gabon, and though they are both coups Gabon's recent history is totally different yet yielded the same coded outcome of "coup")
5. Do needle exchanges and other drug-related harm-reduction policies survive longer in ethnically homogenous communities than ethnically hetereogenous ones? By survival, I mean, "do these policies have a longer time to produce intended effects before they get shut down by electoral turnover or the city council just gives up?" (would be a good extension of the literature on policy termination)
